Grade 8
In grade 8, instructional time should focus on three critical areas: (1) formulating and reasoning about expressions and  
equations, including modeling an association in bivariate data with a linear equation, and solving linear equations and systems 
of linear equations; (2) grasping the concept of a function and using functions to describe quantitative relationships; (3) analyz-
ing two- and three-dimensional space and ﬁgures using distance, angle, similarity, and congruence, and understanding and 
applying the Pythagorean Theorem. 
(1) Students use linear equations and systems of linear equations to represent, analyze, and solve a variety of problems. 
Students recognize equations for proportions (y/x = m or y = mx) as special linear equations (y = mx + b), understanding 
that the constant of proportionality (m) is the slope, and the graphs are lines through the origin. They understand that the 
slope (m) of a line is a constant rate of change, so that if the input or x-coordinate changes by an amount A, the output or 
y-coordinate changes by the amount m . A. Students also use a linear equation to describe the association between two 
quantities in bivariate data (such as arm span versus height for students in a classroom). At this grade, ﬁtting the model 
and assessing its ﬁt to the data are done informally. Interpreting the model in the context of the data requires students 
to express a relationship between the two quantities in question and to interpret components of the relationship (such as 
slope and y-intercept) in terms of the situation.
Students strategically choose and efﬁciently implement procedures to solve linear equations in one variable, understanding  
that when they use the properties of equality and the concept of logical equivalence, they maintain the solutions of the 
original equation. Students solve systems of two linear equations in two variables and relate the systems to pairs of lines 
in the plane; these intersect, are parallel, or are the same line. Students use linear equations, systems of linear equations, 
linear functions, and their understanding of slope of a line to analyze situations and solve problems.
(2)  Students grasp the concept of a function as a rule that assigns to each input exactly one output. They understand that 
functions describe situations where one quantity determines another. They can translate among representations and partial 
representations of functions (noting that tabular and graphical representations may be partial representations), and they 
describe how aspects of the function are reﬂected in the different representations.
(3)  Students use ideas about distance and angles, how they behave under translations, rotations, reﬂections, and dilations, 
and ideas about congruence and similarity to describe and analyze two-dimensional ﬁgures and to solve problems. Students  
show that the sum of the angles in a triangle is the angle formed by a straight line, and that various conﬁgurations of lines 
give rise to similar triangles because of the angles created when a transversal cuts parallel lines. Students understand the 
statement of the Pythagorean Theorem and its converse, and can explain why the Pythagorean Theorem holds, for example, 
by decomposing a square in two different ways. They apply the Pythagorean Theorem to ﬁnd distances between points on 
the coordinate plane, to ﬁnd lengths, and to analyze polygons. Students complete their work on volume by solving problems 
involving cones, cylinders, and spheres.
52 | K–8 Standards
Grade 8


--- Page Break ---

 
Grade 8 Overview
The Number System
 
Know that there are numbers that are not rational, and  
approximate them by rational numbers. 
Expressions and Equations
 
Work with radicals and integer exponents.
 
Understand the connection between proportional  
relationships, lines, and linear equations.
 
Analyze and solve linear equations and pairs of simultaneous  
linear equations.
Functions
 
Deﬁne, evaluate, and compare functions.
 
Use functions to model relationships between quantities.
Geometry
 
Understand congruence and similarity using physical models,  
transparencies, or geometry software.
 
Understand and apply the Pythagorean Theorem.
 
Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving volume of cylinders, cones, and spheres.
Statistics and Probability
 
Investigate patterns of association in bivariate data.
Mathematical Practices
1.  Make sense of problems and persevere in 
solving them.
2.  Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
3.  Construct viable arguments and critique the 
reasoning of others.
4.  Model with mathematics.
5.  Use appropriate tools strategically.
6.  Attend to precision.
7.  Look for and make use of structure.
8.  Look for and express regularity in repeated 
reasoning.
Grade 8
K–8 Standards | 53


--- Page Break ---

54 | K–8 Standards
8
Grade 8
The Number System 
8.NS
Know that there are numbers that are not rational, and approximate them by rational numbers.
1.  Know that numbers that are not rational are called irrational. Understand informally that every number has a decimal  
expansion; for rational numbers show that the decimal expansion repeats eventually, and convert a decimal expansion 
which repeats eventually into a rational number. 
2.  Use rational approximations of irrational numbers to compare the size of irrational numbers, locate them approximately on a 
number line diagram, and estimate the value of expressions (e.g.,π 2). For example, by truncating the decimal expansion of  
√2, show that √2 is between 1 and 2, then between 1.4 and 1.5, and explain how to continue on to get better approximations.
Expressions and Equations 
8.EE
Work with radicals and integer exponents.
1.  Know and apply the properties of integer exponents to generate equivalent numerical expressions. For example,  
32 × 3–5 = 3–3 = 1/33 = 1/27.
2.  Use square root and cube root symbols to represent solutions to equations of the form x2 = p and x3 = p, where p is a  
positive rational number. Evaluate square roots of small perfect squares and cube roots of small perfect cubes. Know that 
√2 is irrational.
3.  Use numbers expressed in the form of a single digit times an integer power of 10 to estimate very large or very small  
quantities, and to express how many times as much one is than the other. For example, estimate the population of the 
United States as 3 × 108 and the population of the world as 7 × 109, and determine that the world population is more  
than 20 times larger.
4.  Perform operations with numbers expressed in scientiﬁc notation, including problems where both decimal and scientiﬁc 
notation are used. Use scientiﬁc notation and choose units of appropriate size for measurements of very large or very small 
quantities (e.g., use millimeters per year for seaﬂoor spreading). Interpret scientiﬁc notation that has been generated by 
technology.
Understand the connections between proportional relationships, lines, and linear equations.
5.  Graph proportional relationships, interpreting the unit rate as the slope of the graph. Compare two different proportional 
relationships represented in different ways. For example, compare a distance-time graph to a distance-time equation to 
determine which of two moving objects has greater speed.
6.  Use similar triangles to explain why the slope m is the same between any two distinct points on a non-vertical line in the 
coordinate plane; derive the equation y = mx for a line through the origin and the equation y = mx + b for a line intercepting 
the vertical axis at b.
Analyze and solve linear equations and pairs of simultaneous linear equations.
7. Solve linear equations in one variable.
a.  Give examples of linear equations in one variable with one solution, inﬁnitely many solutions, or no solutions. Show 
which of these possibilities is the case by successively transforming the given equation into simpler forms, until an 
equivalent equation of the form x = a, a = a, or a = b results (where a and b are different numbers).
b.  Solve linear equations with rational number coefﬁcients, including equations whose solutions require expanding  
expressions using the distributive property and collecting like terms.
Grade 8


--- Page Break ---

Grade 8 8
8.  Analyze and solve pairs of simultaneous linear equations.
a.  Understand that solutions to a system of two linear equations in two variables correspond to points of intersection of 
their graphs, because points of intersection satisfy both equations simultaneously.
b.  Solve systems of two linear equations in two variables algebraically, and estimate solutions by graphing the equations. 
Solve simple cases by inspection. For example, 3x + 2y = 5 and 3x + 2y = 6 have no solution because 3x + 2y cannot 
simultaneously be 5 and 6.
c.  Solve real-world and mathematical problems leading to to linear equations in two variables. For example, given  
coordinates for two pairs of points, determine whether the line through the ﬁrst pair of points intersects the line through 
the second pair.
Functions 
8.F
Deﬁne, evaluate, and compare functions.
1.  Understand that a function is a rule that assigns to each input exactly one output. The graph of a function is the set of 
ordered pairs consisting of an input and the corresponding output.1
2.  Compare properties of two functions each represented in a different way (algebraically, graphically, numerically in tables,  
or by verbal descriptions). For example, given a linear function represented by a table of values and a linear function  
represented by an algebraic expression, determine which function has the greater rate of change.
3.  Interpret the equation y = mx + b as deﬁning a linear function, whose graph is a straight line; give examples of functions 
that are not linear. For example, the function A = s2 giving the area of a square as a function of its side length is not linear 
because its graph contains the points (1,1), (2,4) and (3,9), which are not on a straight line.
Use functions to model relationships between quantities.
4.  Construct a function to model a linear relationship between two quantities. Determine the rate of change and initial value 
of the function from a description of a relationship or from two (x, y) values, including reading these from a table or from a 
graph. Interpret the rate of change and initial value of a linear function in terms of the situation it models, and in terms of 
its graph or a table of values.
5.  Describe qualitatively the functional relationship between two quantities by analyzing a graph (e.g., where the function is 
increasing or decreasing, linear or nonlinear). Sketch a graph that exhibits the qualitative features of a function that has 
been described verbally.
Geometry 
8.G
Understand congruence and similarity using physical models, transparencies, or geometry software.
1.  Verify experimentally the properties of rotations, reﬂections, and translations:
a.  Lines are taken to lines, and line segments to line segments of the same length.
b.  Angles are taken to angles of the same measure.
c.  Parallel lines are taken to parallel lines.
1. Function notation is not required in grade 8.
Grade 8
K–8 Standards  | 55


--- Page Break ---

8
Grade 8
2.  Understand that a two-dimensional ﬁgure is congruent to another if the second can be obtained from the ﬁrst by a sequence 
of rotations, reﬂections, and translations; given two congruent ﬁgures, describe a sequence that exhibits the congruence 
between them.
3.  Describe the effect of dilations, translations, rotations, and reﬂections on two-dimensional ﬁgures using coordinates.
4.  Understand that a two-dimensional ﬁgure is similar to another if the second can be obtained from the ﬁrst by a sequence 
of rotations, reﬂections, translations, and dilations; given two similar two-dimensional ﬁgures, describe a sequence that 
exhibits the similarity between them.
5.  Use informal arguments to establish facts about the angle sum and exterior angle of triangles, about the angles created 
when parallel lines are cut by a transversal, and the angle-angle criterion for similarity of triangles. For example, arrange 
three copies of the same triangle so that the sum of the three angles appears to form a line, and give an argument in  
terms of transversals why this is so.
Understand and apply the Pythagorean Theorem.
6.  Explain a proof of the Pythagorean Theorem and its converse.
7.  Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to determine unknown side lengths in right triangles in real-world and mathematical  
problems in two and three dimensions.
8.  Apply the Pythagorean Theorem to ﬁnd the distance between two points in a coordinate system.
Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving volume of cylinders, cones, and spheres.
9.  Know the formulas for the volumes of cones, cylinders, and spheres and use them to solve real-world and mathematical 
problems.
Statistics and Probability 
8.SP
Investigate patterns of association in bivariate data.
1.  Construct and interpret scatter plots for bivariate measurement data to investigate patterns of association between two 
quantities. Describe patterns such as clustering, outliers, positive or negative association, linear association, and nonlinear 
association.
2.  Know that straight lines are widely used to model relationships between two quantitative variables. For scatter plots that 
suggest a linear association, informally ﬁt a straight line, and informally assess the model ﬁt by judging the closeness of the 
data points to the line.
3.  Use the equation of a linear model to solve problems in the context of bivariate measurement data, interpreting the slope 
and intercept. For example, in a linear model for a biology experiment, interpret a slope of 1.5 cm/hr as meaning that an 
additional hour of sunlight each day is associated with an additional 1.5 cm in mature plant height.
4.  Understand that patterns of association can also be seen in bivariate categorical data by displaying frequencies and relative  
frequencies in a two-way table. Construct and interpret a two-way table summarizing data on two categorical variables 
collected from the same subjects. Use relative frequencies calculated for rows or columns to describe possible association 
between the two variables. For example, collect data from students in your class on whether or not they have a curfew on 
school nights and whether or not they have assigned chores at home. Is there evidence that those who have a curfew also 
tend to have chores?
56 | K–8 Standards
Grade 8


--- Page Break ---

