Grade 3
In grade 3, instructional time should focus on four critical areas: (1) developing understanding of multiplication and division  
and strategies for multiplication and division within 100; (2) developing understanding of fractions, especially unit fractions 
(fractions with numerator 1); (3) developing understanding of the structure of rectangular arrays and of area; and (4) describing 
and analyzing two-dimensional shapes. 
(1) Students develop an understanding of the meanings of multiplication and division of whole numbers through activities and 
problems involving equal-sized groups, arrays, and area models; multiplication is ﬁnding an unknown product, and division 
is ﬁnding an unknown factor in these situations. For equal-sized group situations, division can require ﬁnding the unknown 
number of groups or the unknown group size. Students use properties of operations to calculate products of whole numbers,  
using increasingly sophisticated strategies based on these properties to solve multiplication and division problems involving 
single-digit factors. By comparing a variety of solution strategies, students learn the relationship between multiplication and 
division. 
(2) Students develop an understanding of fractions, beginning with unit fractions. Students view fractions in general as being 
built out of unit fractions, and they use fractions along with visual fraction models to represent parts of a whole. Students 
understand that the size of a fractional part is relative to the size of the whole. For example, 1/2 of the paint in a small 
bucket could be less paint than 1/3 of the paint in a larger bucket, but 1/3 of a ribbon is longer than 1/5 of the same  
ribbon because when the ribbon is divided into 3 equal parts, the parts are longer than when the ribbon is divided into  
5 equal parts. Students are able to use fractions to represent numbers equal to, less than, and greater than one. They  
solve problems that involve comparing fractions by using visual fraction models and strategies based on noticing equal 
numerators or denominators. 
(3) Students recognize area as an attribute of two-dimensional regions. They measure the area of a shape by ﬁnding the total 
number of same-size units of area required to cover the shape without gaps or overlaps, a square with sides of unit length 
being the standard unit for measuring area. Students understand that rectangular arrays can be decomposed into identical  
rows or into identical columns. By decomposing rectangles into rectangular arrays of squares, students connect area to 
multiplication, and justify using multiplication to determine the area of a rectangle. 
(4) Students describe, analyze, and compare properties of two-dimensional shapes. They compare and classify shapes by their 
sides and angles, and connect these with deﬁnitions of shapes. Students also relate their fraction work to geometry by 
expressing the area of part of a shape as a unit fraction of the whole.
Grade 3
K–8 Standards | 23


--- Page Break ---

Grade 3 Overview
Operations and Algebraic Thinking
 
Represent and solve problems involving multiplication and  
division.

Understand properties of multiplication and the relationship
between multiplication and division.
 
Multiply and divide within 100.

Solve problems involving the four operations, and identify
and explain patterns in arithmetic.
Number and Operations in Base Ten
 
Use place value understanding and properties of operations  
to perform multi-digit arithmetic.
Number and Operations—Fractions

Develop understanding of fractions as numbers.
Measurement and Data
 
Solve problems involving measurement and estimation of  
intervals of time, liquid volumes, and masses of objects.
 
Represent and interpret data.
 
Geometric measurement: understand concepts of area and relate area to multiplication and to addition.
 
Geometric measurement: recognize perimeter as an attribute of plane ﬁgures and distinguish between linear and area  
measures.
Geometry
 
Reason with shapes and their attributes.
Mathematical Practices
1.  Make sense of problems and persevere in  
solving them.
2.  Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
3.  Construct viable arguments and critique the 
reasoning of others.
4.  Model with mathematics.
5.  Use appropriate tools strategically.
6.  Attend to precision.
7.  Look for and make use of structure.
8.  Look for and express regularity in repeated 
reasoning.
24 | K–8 Standards
Grade 3


--- Page Break ---

K–8 Standards  | 25
3
Grade 3 
Grade 3
Operations and Algebraic Thinking 
3.OA
Represent and solve problems involving multiplication and division.
1.  Interpret products of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 5 × 7 as the total number of objects in 5 groups of 7 objects each.  
For example, describe a context in which a total number of objects can be expressed as 5 × 7. 
2.  Interpret whole-number quotients of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 56 ÷ 8 as the number of objects in each share when 56 
objects are partitioned equally into 8 shares, or as a number of shares when 56 objects are partitioned into equal shares of 8 
objects each. For example, describe a context in which a number of shares or a number of groups can be expressed as 56÷8.
3.  Use multiplication and division within 100 to solve word problems in situations involving equal groups, arrays, and measure-
ment quantities, e.g., by using drawings and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem.1
4.  Determine the unknown whole number in a multiplication or division equation relating three whole numbers. For example, 
determine the unknown number that makes the equation true in each of the equations 8 × ? = 48, 5 =  ÷ 3, 6 × 6 = ?.
Understand properties of multiplication and the relationship between multiplication and division.
5. Apply properties of operations as strategies to multiply and divide.2 Examples: If 6 × 4 = 24 is known, then 4 × 6 = 24 is 
also known. (Commutative property of multiplication.) 3 × 5 × 2 can be found by 3 × 5 = 15, then 15 × 2 = 30, or 
by 5 × 2 = 10, then 3 × 10 = 30. (Associative property of multiplication.) Knowing that 8 × 5 = 40 and 8 × 2 = 16,  
one can ﬁnd 8 × 7 as 8 × (5 + 2) = (8 × 5) + (8 × 2) = 40 + 16 = 56. (Distributive property.)
6. Understand division as an unknown-factor problem. For example, ﬁnd 32 ÷ 8 by ﬁnding the number that makes 32 when 
multiplied by 8.
Multiply and divide within 100.
7. Fluently multiply and divide within 100, using strategies such as the relationship between multiplication and division  
(e.g., knowing that 8 × 5 = 40, one knows 40 ÷ 5 = 8) or properties of operations. By the end of Grade 3, know from 
memory all products of two one-digit numbers.
Solve problems involving the four operations, and identify and explain patterns in arithmetic.
8.  Solve two-step word problems using the four operations. Represent these problems using equations with a letter standing  
for the unknown quantity. Assess the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies 
including rounding.32
9.  Identify arithmetic patterns (including patterns in the addition table or multiplication table), and explain them using  
properties of operations. For example, observe that 4 times a number is always even, and explain why 4 times a number 
can be decomposed into two equal addends.
Number and Operations in Base Ten 
3.NBT
Use place value understanding and properties of operations to perform multi-digit arithmetic.4
1. Use place value understanding to round whole numbers to the nearest 10 or 100.
1. See Glossary, Table 2.
2. Students need not use formal terms for these properties.
3. This standard is limited to problems posed with whole numbers and having whole-number answers; students should know how to perform operations in 
the conventional order when there are no parentheses to specify a particular order (Order of Operations).
4. A range of algorithms may be used.


--- Page Break ---

3
Grade 3
2.  Fluently add and subtract within 1000 using strategies and algorithms based on place value, properties of operations,  
and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction.
3.  Multiply one-digit whole numbers by multiples of 10 in the range 10–90 (e.g., 9 × 80, 5 × 60) using strategies based on 
place value and properties of operations.
Number and Operations—Fractions5 
3.NF
Develop understanding of fractions as numbers.3
1.  Understand a fraction 1/b as the quantity formed by 1 part when a whole is partitioned into b equal parts; understand a 
fraction a/b as the quantity formed by a parts of size 1/b.
2.  Understand a fraction as a number on the number line; represent fractions on a number line diagram.
a. Represent a fraction 1/b on a number line diagram by deﬁning the interval from 0 to 1 as the whole and partitioning 
it into b equal parts. Recognize that each part has size 1/b and that the endpoint of the part based at 0 locates the 
number 1/b on the number line.
b. Represent a fraction a/b on a number line diagram by marking off a lengths 1/b from 0. Recognize that the resulting 
interval has size a/b and that its endpoint locates the number a/b on the number line.
3.  Explain equivalence of fractions in special cases, and compare fractions by reasoning about their size.
a. Understand two fractions as equivalent (equal) if they are the same size, or the same point on a number line. 
b. Recognize and generate simple equivalent fractions, e.g., 1/2 = 2/4, 4/6 = 2/3). Explain why the fractions are  
equivalent, e.g., by using a visual fraction model.
c. Express whole numbers as fractions, and recognize fractions that are equivalent to whole numbers. Examples:  
Express 3 in the form 3 = 3/1; recognize that 6/1 = 6; locate 4/4 and 1 at the same point of a number line diagram.
d.  Compare two fractions with the same numerator or the same denominator by reasoning about their size. Recognize that 
comparisons are valid only when the two fractions refer to the same whole. Record the results of comparisons with the 
symbols >, =, or <, and justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model.
Measurement and Data 
3.MD
Solve problems involving measurement and estimation of intervals of time, liquid volumes, and masses of objects.
1. Tell and write time to the nearest minute and measure time intervals in minutes. Solve word problems involving addition and 
subtraction of time intervals in minutes, e.g., by representing the problem on a number line diagram.
2. Measure and estimate liquid volumes and masses of objects using standard units of grams (g), kilograms (kg), and liters 
(l).6 Add, subtract, multiply, or divide to solve one-step word problems involving masses or volumes that are given in the 
same units, e.g., by using drawings (such as a beaker with a measurement scale) to represent the problem.74
5. Grade 3 expectations in this domain are limited to fractions with denominators 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8.
6. Excludes compound units such as cm3 and ﬁnding the geometric volume of a container.
7. Excludes multiplicative comparison problems (problems involving notions of “times as much”; see Glossary, Table 2).
26 | K–8 Standards
Grade 3


--- Page Break ---

Grade 3 3
Represent and interpret data.
3.  Draw a scaled picture graph and a scaled bar graph to represent a data set with several categories. Solve one- and two-
step “how many more” and “how many less” problems using information presented in scaled bar graphs. For example, draw 
a bar graph in which each square in the bar graph might represent 5 pets.
4.  Generate measurement data by measuring lengths using rulers marked with halves and fourths of an inch. Show the data by 
making a line plot, where the horizontal scale is marked off in appropriate units—whole numbers, halves, or quarters.
Geometric measurement: understand concepts of area and relate area to multiplication and to addition.
5.  Recognize area as an attribute of plane ﬁgures and understand concepts of area measurement.
a.  A square with side length 1 unit, called “a unit square,” is said to have “one square unit” of area, and can be used to 
measure area.
b.  A plane ﬁgure which can be covered without gaps or overlaps by n unit squares is said to have an area of n square 
units.
6.  Measure areas by counting unit squares (square cm, square m, square in, square ft, and improvised units).
7.  Relate area to the operations of multiplication and addition.
a.  Find the area of a rectangle with whole-number side lengths by tiling it, and show that the area is the same as would be 
found by multiplying the side lengths.
b.  Multiply side lengths to ﬁnd areas of rectangles with whole-number side lengths in the context of solving real-world and 
mathematical problems, and represent whole-number products as rectangular areas in mathematical reasoning.
c.  Use tiling to show in a concrete case that the area of a rectangle with whole-number side lengths a and b + c is the 
sum of a × b and a × c. Use area models to represent the distributive property in mathematical reasoning.
d.  Recognize area as additive. Find areas of rectilinear ﬁgures by decomposing them into non-overlapping rectangles and 
adding the areas of the non-overlapping parts, applying this technique to solve real-world problems.
Geometric measurement: recognize perimeter as an attribute of plane ﬁgures and distinguish between linear 
and area measures.
8.  Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving perimeters of polygons, including ﬁnding the perimeter given the side 
lengths, ﬁnding an unknown side length, and exhibiting rectangles with the same perimeter and different areas or with the 
same area and different perimeters.
Geometry 
3.G
Reason with shapes and their attributes.
1.  Understand that shapes in different categories (e.g., rhombuses, rectangles, and others) may share attributes (e.g., having 
four sides), and that the shared attributes can deﬁne a larger category (e.g., quadrilaterals). Recognize rhombuses,  
rectangles, and squares as examples of quadrilaterals, and draw examples of quadrilaterals that do not belong to any of 
these subcategories.
2.  Partition shapes into parts with equal areas. Express the area of each part as a unit fraction of the whole. For example, 
partition a shape into 4 parts with equal area, and describe the area of each part as 1/4 of the area of the shape.
Grade 3
K–8 Standards  | 27


--- Page Break ---

