Grade 5
In grade 5, instructional time should focus on three critical areas: (1) developing ﬂuency with addition and subtraction of  
fractions, and developing understanding of the multiplication of fractions and of division of fractions in limited cases (unit  
fractions divided by whole numbers and whole numbers divided by unit fractions); (2) extending division to two-digit divisors, 
integrating decimal fractions into the place value system and developing understanding of operations with decimals to  
hundredths, and developing ﬂuency with whole number and decimal operations; and (3) developing understanding of volume.
(1) Students apply their understanding of fractions and fraction models to represent the addition and subtraction of fractions 
with unlike denominators as equivalent calculations with like denominators. They develop ﬂuency in calculating sums and 
differences of fractions, and make reasonable estimates of them. Students also use the meaning of fractions, of multiplica-
tion and division, and the relationship between multiplication and division to understand and explain why the procedures for 
multiplying and dividing fractions make sense. (Note: this is limited to the case of dividing unit fractions by whole numbers 
and whole numbers by unit fractions.) 
(2) Students develop understanding of why division procedures work based on the meaning of base-ten numerals and  
properties of operations. They ﬁnalize ﬂuency with multi-digit addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. They apply 
their understandings of models for decimals, decimal notation, and properties of operations to add and subtract decimals 
to hundredths. They develop ﬂuency in these computations, and make reasonable estimates of their results. Students use  
the relationship between decimals and fractions, as well as the relationship between ﬁnite decimals and whole numbers  
(i.e., a ﬁnite decimal multiplied by an appropriate power of 10 is a whole number), to understand and explain why the 
procedures for multiplying and dividing ﬁnite decimals make sense. They compute products and quotients of decimals to 
hundredths efﬁciently and accurately. 
(3) Students recognize volume as an attribute of three-dimensional space. They understand that volume can be measured by 
ﬁnding the total number of same-size units of volume required to ﬁll the space without gaps or overlaps. They understand 
that a 1-unit by 1-unit by 1-unit cube is the standard unit for measuring volume. They select appropriate units, strategies, 
and tools for solving problems that involve estimating and measuring volume. They decompose three-dimensional shapes 
and ﬁnd volumes of right rectangular prisms by viewing them as decomposed into layers of arrays of cubes. They measure 
necessary attributes of shapes in order to determine volumes to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
34 | K–8 Standards
Grade 5


--- Page Break ---

 
Grade 5 Overview
Operations and Algebraic Thinking
 
Write and interpret numerical expressions.
 
Analyze patterns and relationships.
Number and Operations in Base Ten
 
Understand the place value system.
 
Perform operations with multi-digit whole numbers and with 
decimals to hundredths.
Number and Operations—Fractions
 
Use equivalent fractions as a strategy to add and subtract  
fractions.
 
Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication  
and division to multiply and divide fractions.
Measurement and Data
 
Convert like measurement units within a given measurement 
system.
 
Represent and interpret data.
 
Geometric measurement: understand concepts of volume and relate volume to multiplication and to addition.
Geometry
 
Graph points on the coordinate plane to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
 
Classify two-dimensional ﬁgures into categories based on their properties.
Mathematical Practices
1.  Make sense of problems and persevere in  
solving them.
2.  Reason abstractly and quantitatively.
3.  Construct viable arguments and critique the 
 
reasoning of others.
4.  Model with mathematics.
5.  Use appropriate tools strategically.
6.  Attend to precision.
7.  Look for and make use of structure.
8.  Look for and express regularity in repeated 
reasoning.
 
Grade 5
K–8 Standards | 35


--- Page Break ---

5
Grade 5
Operations and Algebraic Thinking 
5.OA
Write and interpret numerical expressions.
1.  Use parentheses, brackets, or braces in numerical expressions, and evaluate expressions with these symbols.
2.  Write simple expressions that record calculations with numbers, and interpret numerical expressions without evaluating 
them. For example, express the calculation “add 8 and 7, then multiply by 2” as 2 × (8 + 7). Recognize that  
3 × (18932 + 921) is three times as large as 18932 + 921, without having to calculate the indicated sum or product.
2.1 Express a whole number in the range 2–50 as a product of its prime factors. For example, ﬁnd the prime factors of 24 and 
express 24 as 2 × 2 × 2 × 3. CA
Analyze patterns and relationships.
3.  Generate two numerical patterns using two given rules. Identify apparent relationships between corresponding terms. Form 
ordered pairs consisting of corresponding terms from the two patterns, and graph the ordered pairs on a coordinate plane. 
For example, given the rule “Add 3” and the starting number 0, and given the rule “Add 6” and the starting number 0,  
generate terms in the resulting sequences, and observe that the terms in one sequence are twice the corresponding terms 
in the other sequence. Explain informally why this is so.
Number and Operations in Base Ten 
5.NBT
Understand the place value system.
1.  Recognize that in a multi-digit number, a digit in one place represents 10 times as much as it represents in the place to its 
right and 1/10 of what it represents in the place to its left.
2.  Explain patterns in the number of zeros of the product when multiplying a number by powers of 10, and explain patterns in 
the placement of the decimal point when a decimal is multiplied or divided by a power of 10. Use whole-number exponents 
to denote powers of 10.
3.  Read, write, and compare decimals to thousandths.
a.  Read and write decimals to thousandths using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form, e.g.,  
347.392 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10) + 9 × (1/100) + 2 × (1/1000).
b.  Compare two decimals to thousandths based on meanings of the digits in each place, using >, =, and < symbols to 
record the results of comparisons.
4.  Use place value understanding to round decimals to any place.
Perform operations with multi-digit whole numbers and with decimals to hundredths.
5.  Fluently multiply multi-digit whole numbers using the standard algorithm.
6.  Find whole-number quotients of whole numbers with up to four-digit dividends and two-digit divisors, using strategies based 
on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrate and 
explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models.
7.  Add, subtract, multiply, and divide decimals to hundredths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on 
place value, properties of operations, and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a 
written method and explain the reasoning used.
36 | K–8 Standards
Grade 5


--- Page Break ---

Grade 5 5
Number and Operations—Fractions 
5.NF
Use equivalent fractions as a strategy to add and subtract fractions.
1.  Add and subtract fractions with unlike denominators (including mixed numbers) by replacing given fractions with equivalent 
fractions in such a way as to produce an equivalent sum or difference of fractions with like denominators. For example, 
2/3 + 5/4 = 8/12 + 15/12 = 23/12. (In general, a/b + c/d = (ad + bc)/bd.)
2.  Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions referring to the same whole, including cases of unlike 
denominators, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem. Use benchmark fractions and 
number sense of fractions to estimate mentally and assess the reasonableness of answers. For example, recognize an 
incorrect result 2/5 + 1/2 = 3/7, by observing that 3/7 < 1/2.
Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication and division to multiply and divide fractions.
3.  Interpret a fraction as division of the numerator by the denominator (a/b = a ÷ b). Solve word problems involving division  
of whole numbers leading to answers in the form of fractions or mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or 
equations to represent the problem. For example, interpret 3/4 as the result of dividing 3 by 4, noting that 3/4 multiplied 
by 4 equals 3, and that when 3 wholes are shared equally among 4 people each person has a share of size 3/4. If 9 people 
want to share a 50-pound sack of rice equally by weight, how many pounds of rice should each person get? Between what 
two whole numbers does your answer lie? 
4.  Apply and extend previous understandings of multiplication to multiply a fraction or whole number by a fraction.
a. Interpret the product (a/b) × q as a parts of a partition of q into b equal parts; equivalently, as the result of a sequence 
of operations a × q ÷ b. For example, use a visual fraction model to show (2/3) × 4 = 8/3, and create a story context 
for this equation. Do the same with (2/3) × (4/5) = 8/15. (In general, (a/b) × (c/d) = ac/bd.)
b. Find the area of a rectangle with fractional side lengths by tiling it with unit squares of the appropriate unit fraction side 
lengths, and show that the area is the same as would be found by multiplying the side lengths. Multiply fractional side 
lengths to ﬁnd areas of rectangles, and represent fraction products as rectangular areas.
5.  Interpret multiplication as scaling (resizing), by:
a.  Comparing the size of a product to the size of one factor on the basis of the size of the other factor, without performing 
the indicated multiplication.
b.  Explaining why multiplying a given number by a fraction greater than 1 results in a product greater than the given 
number (recognizing multiplication by whole numbers greater than 1 as a familiar case); explaining why multiplying a 
given number by a fraction less than 1 results in a product smaller than the given number; and relating the principle of 
fraction equivalence a/b = (n × a)/(n × b) to the effect of multiplying a/b by 1.
6.  Solve real-world problems involving multiplication of fractions and mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or 
equations to represent the problem.
7.  Apply and extend previous understandings of division to divide unit fractions by whole numbers and whole numbers by unit 
fractions.1
a.  Interpret division of a unit fraction by a non-zero whole number, and compute such quotients. For example, create  
a story context for (1/3) ÷ 4, and use a visual fraction model to show the quotient. Use the relationship between  
multiplication and division to explain that (1/3) ÷ 4 = 1/12 because (1/12) × 4 = 1/3.
1. Students able to multiply fractions in general can develop strategies to divide fractions in general, by reasoning about the relationship between  
multiplication and division. But division of a fraction by a fraction is not a requirement at this grade.
Grade 5
K–8 Standards  | 37


--- Page Break ---

5
Grade 5
b.  Interpret division of a whole number by a unit fraction, and compute such quotients. For example, create a story context 
for 4 ÷ (1/5), and use a visual fraction model to show the quotient. Use the relationship between multiplication and 
division to explain that 4 ÷ (1/5) = 20 because 20 × (1/5) = 4.
c.  Solve real-world problems involving division of unit fractions by non-zero whole numbers and division of whole numbers 
by unit fractions, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. For example, how much 
chocolate will each person get if 3 people share 1/2 lb of chocolate equally? How many 1/3-cup servings are in 2 cups 
of raisins?
Measurement and Data 
5.MD
Convert like measurement units within a given measurement system.
1.  Convert among different-sized standard measurement units within a given measurement system (e.g., convert 5 cm to  
0.05 m), and use these conversions in solving multi-step, real-world problems.
Represent and interpret data.
2.  Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Use operations on fractions 
for this grade to solve problems involving information presented in line plots. For example, given different measurements of 
liquid in identical beakers, ﬁnd the amount of liquid each beaker would contain if the total amount in all the beakers were  
redistributed equally.
Geometric measurement: understand concepts of volume and relate volume to multiplication and to addition.
3.  Recognize volume as an attribute of solid ﬁgures and understand concepts of volume measurement.
a.  A cube with side length 1 unit, called a “unit cube,” is said to have “one cubic unit” of volume, and can be used to  
measure volume.
b.  A solid ﬁgure which can be packed without gaps or overlaps using n unit cubes is said to have a volume of n cubic units.
4.  Measure volumes by counting unit cubes, using cubic cm, cubic in, cubic ft, and improvised units.
5.  Relate volume to the operations of multiplication and addition and solve real-world and mathematical problems involving 
volume.
a.  Find the volume of a right rectangular prism with whole-number side lengths by packing it with unit cubes, and show 
that the volume is the same as would be found by multiplying the edge lengths, equivalently by multiplying the height 
by the area of the base. Represent threefold whole-number products as volumes, e.g., to represent the associative 
property of multiplication.
b.  Apply the formulas V = l × w × h and V = b × h for rectangular prisms to ﬁnd volumes of right rectangular prisms with 
whole-number edge lengths in the context of solving real-world and mathematical problems.
c.  Recognize volume as additive. Find volumes of solid ﬁgures composed of two non-overlapping right rectangular prisms 
by adding the volumes of the non-overlapping parts, applying this technique to solve real-world problems.
38 | K–8 Standards
Grade 5


--- Page Break ---

Grade 5 5
Geometry 
5.G
Graph points on the coordinate plane to solve real-world and mathematical problems.
1.  Use a pair of perpendicular number lines, called axes, to deﬁne a coordinate system, with the intersection of the lines  
(the origin) arranged to coincide with the 0 on each line and a given point in the plane located by using an ordered pair of 
numbers, called its coordinates. Understand that the ﬁrst number indicates how far to travel from the origin in the direction 
of one axis, and the second number indicates how far to travel in the direction of the second axis, with the convention that 
the names of the two axes and the coordinates correspond (e.g., x-axis and x-coordinate, y-axis and y-coordinate).
2.  Represent real-world and mathematical problems by graphing points in the ﬁrst quadrant of the coordinate plane, and  
interpret coordinate values of points in the context of the situation.
Classify two-dimensional ﬁgures into categories based on their properties.
3.  Understand that attributes belonging to a category of two-dimensional ﬁgures also belong to all subcategories of that cat-
egory. For example, all rectangles have four right angles and squares are rectangles, so all squares have four right angles.
4.  Classify two-dimensional ﬁgures in a hierarchy based on properties.
Grade 5
K–8 Standards  | 39


--- Page Break ---

